# Hello, Go

## Why Go?

Go was built at Google, as company we know as a synonym for Search and Distributed Computing, with their Borg (now Kubernetes). They wanted a language that was fast, worked well with automated code review and formatting and allowed a large team to write large scale software effectively. They also wanted a modern language catered to the multi-processor and the networking era. With millions of server racks, they wanted a language and Go was the solution to that problem. 

All the major language in use are at least a decade old. They were created in an era where memory was costly, where there were no massive clusters. This is why C allows the programmer to do memory managment. Concurrency or the multi-core archictecture simply weren't a factor in that era. Go was designed with concurrency in mind which isn't parallelism. Go was built to write web servers, the backend part of the Internet. But it got adopted as a general purpose programming language.

When switching from other languages to Go, it'll be more or less frusterating to see the restrictions Go has. But as you tag along, the nusiances pay off when we consider manging the codebase. The language wants you to get up and running with your software as soon as possible and provide a scalable approach to build the application over a long period of time. The language provides tools for things like formatting inturn forcing standardization so there is no room for factions in developers.

In the C family of languages, there are two factions:

    public static void main() {

    }
    
vs

    public static void main() 
    {

    }

The same can be said of Python spaces/tabs.

This might seem to be a shallow problem at the top, but when the codebase and team size grows, then it is difficult to maintain the code's "beauty"  because of different user preferences. Anyone can write code these days, only few can write elegant code. Other languages had to solve this problem as an afterthought, Python has PEP8. These are recommendations and not mandatory. While in Go they have been built into the language. Go isn't just a language, it is an ecosystem and it caters to the entire software development cycle.

It aims to provide the efficiency of a statically-typed compiled language with the ease of programming of a dynamic language.

1. Unused imports/variables are compiler errors.
1. No need to put semicolon's because the compiler itself will add semi-colons at the end of line, this is the reason you can't write functions like the second way, we mentioned in the above section.
1. All your Go code is present in a single folder, $GOPATH, it is called. Say goodbye to your code thrown all around in your machine.
1. gofmt will format your code, so there is only one standard way to write Go code.
1. Batteries included standard libary.
1. Compiled language, thus very fast.
1. Webapps can be written without a framework.
1. Has concurrency built in, no more using threads, just attach the word `go` before a function call to run it in it's own goroutine.
1. Supports Unicode.

Let's start with the customary Hello World.

## First Program

	package main
	
	import "fmt"
	
	func main() {
		fmt.Printf("Hello, world or καλημ ρα κóσμ\n")
	}
	
It prints following information.

	Hello, world or καλημ ρα κóσμ
	
#### Explanation
We import the format package, `fmt` for short. Write the main function of the main package and run the code. We can access only the `Exported` objects of any library in Go. Exported means that the names should start with a capital letter. The compiler  will find the `main` function of the `main` package whenever we build or execute any Go code. 

We printed non ASCII characters. Go supports UTF-8 by default. 

### The main package
It is mandatory for each Go program to be a part of a package. The package can be main or not. 

Every package except main should be a distinct folder on the $GOPATH. Main is a special package which can not have a folder on the $GOPATH.

In our Tasks applications, there can be two ways:

$GOPATH/src/github.com/thewhitetulip/Tasks
- main.go
- view.go

or 

$GOPATH/src/github.com/thewhitetulip/Tasks
- main <- folder
	- main.go
- view.go

In scenarios like this, we need to understand two different ways of executing the application

- With the main folder:

			[Tasks] $ go build main/main.go
			[Tasks] $ ./main/main

This will function correctly, because we are in the Tasks directory while executing our binary, all the templates and other files are present in this folder.

- Without the main folder

			[Tasks/main] $ go build main.go
			[Tasks/main] $ ./main

Here, we are in the Tasks/main directory, the binary will expect all the other files in the Tasks/main directory when they are in the Tasks directory, one level up.

There can be only _one_ main package & function per executable program. The main function takes no arguments passed and returns nothing.
