# Web Programming Basics

Web servers are programs which get a request for a URL and they respond back with it's contents. The request-response is in the HTTP protocol. The Go language has http support in it's standard library as `net/http`.

HTTP was built for transferring plain text, later it allowed multimedia content too. The HTTP2 protocol, which is the successor of HTTP1, is binary.

When we type www.github.com on our browser's address bar, the following things happen:

1. Browser adds either `https://` or `http://` and a trailing forward slash.
2. Our request becomes HTTP GET / github.com.
3. Browser sends out the HTTP GET request to the IP address of the github.com. (Called DNS resolution)
4. Github's servers will process the request and send back a response to our IP address.
5. Our browser will render the page sent in the HTTP Response.

The HTTP response contains a status code.

The status code informs the client of the status of the HTTP server's response. 

Following are the status codes defined in HTTP/1.1:

- 1xx Informational
- 2xx Success
- 3xx Redirection
- 4xx Client Error
- 5xx Server Error

For those who are writing web applications, this might be a big deal, to write servers. But it isn't. At the bottom of it, a server is nothing different from our normal programs, it takes an input, does something about it in the database mostly and responds back with a response. The response might be empty, depending on if the request was valid or invalid.

The browser just abstracts the users from sending and receiving the HTTP request/responses. We can totally do what the browser does manually, build the HTTP request and send it to the server. Receive the response and render it into HTML. There are always two sides to any web app, the browser side and the API side. Browser access is done via the browser and API access is done programatically. Both the ways use HTTP for request-response, but using the API, we can automate a lot of things.

##HTTP Methods
HTTP request-response is done via HTTP methods. 

List of HTTP methods: GET, POST, DELETE, PUT.

GET :   Used to retrieve the URL, `GET /` will get the home page.
POST:   Used to create data stored on the URL.
PUT:    Used to update data on the URL.
DELETE: Used to delete data in the URL.

    // Create a new category.
    // POST /categories

    // Update an existing category.
    // PUT /categories/12

    // View the details of a category.
    // GET /categories/12   

    // Delete an existing category.
    // DELETE /categories/12

Think of categories as a document, POST to create it, GET to fetch it, PUT to update it, and DELETE to delete it. For deleting a task, rather than sending GET `/delete/1234`, we should send a DELETE `/tasks/1234`.

The difference isn't just in the symantics, absolutely anything can send a GET request. GET requires no validation, nothing. If I write a Go program to send GET /delete/<id> where id goes from 0 till a very large number, I can delete all the tasks in our application. Of course, we can also send a DELETE <id> request a million times. GET is the default way to 'get' data from the server, it should not be used as a way of doing things.

#### GET vs POST
Apart from their functional differences, GET and POST differ in security perspectives. Both are insecure.

GET transfers data via the URL. POST sends data in the request's body or payload, but that isn't hidden or encrypted by default, but it isn't visible on the URL, it is easily accessible to anyone who knows how to read a HTTP request.

Security is something you build your application around. There isn't much difference between GET and POST when we consider security, both transfer data in plain text GET is just relatively a little less secure since URLs are logged by a proxy server/firewall/browser history and that GET requests can be done by the browser on behalf of the user without confirmation. Bots are common over the internet, bots can visit randomly to every link present in your application, but they don't send random data to any Form you have, or if so, very few bots can do that.

For protecting data of the webapp, one has to stick to using HTTPS and sanitize any data that comes from the user.

##### Example

A blog consists of a collection of posts, a post has tags, is written by some author, at some time and has some primary key
to uniquely identify it in our database and it has a slug which means the URL.

This is the era of semantic web, thus the new beautiful URLs like, `surajblog.com/posts/welcome-the-new-year`,
the slug is the `welcome-the-new-year`.

When the server gets a HTTP GET request of `/posts/welcome-the-new-year`, it'll search for URL handlers starting with the list of URL
handlers we have given, then it'll find the closest match, in our case it'll be `/post/`, then it'll call the handler of this URL.

Our `/` root URL should be at the very bottom of our list. Because while executing, checks are done from top to bottom.

        //sample handler definition
        http.HandleFunc("/post/", ShowPostBySlug)
        http.HandleFunc("/", ShowAllPosts)

Handler talk to the database, fetch the data and render templates which show up as HTML pages in our browser.

## What is a template?

Templates are a way to present data to the user. The server populated the templates and sends the HTML page back to the browser. For a blog, it doesn't make sense to use a separate html page for each post. This is why there is a post template and the server will get all the details like content, title, date published and populate the post template and return it back to the browser.

A web application is basically a way of representing data stored in the database to the end user using HTTP.

Writing a web application:
1. Fix the database structure.
2. Understand how data flows and decide the URLs.
3. Write templates to corresponding to each URL set.
4. Write functions in Go to handle each URL pattern, called `handlers`.
5. Handlers fetch data from the database and populate data in the templates.

###### Not abusing templates
The logic behind creating templates was to not to repeat HTML code. Templates support variables which our handlers are going to use. The standard way is to handle the business login inside the handler and use templates just for rendering the data. Templates are to be used only for the presentation logic *not* the business logic. It becomes difficult to maintain applications which have business logic inside the template. It should never be done and is a very bad programming practice.

####Example:
We are going to build a todo list manager in this book. It support multiple users.

Wrong way: Fetch all tasks in the template and only show those of the current user. i.e. filter the tasks in the template
Correct way: Fetch only the tasks belonging to the current user. i.e. filter the tasks in the handler.

Functionality of our *EditTask* URL which is `/edit/<id>`.

file `views/addViews.go`

        //EditTaskFunc is our handler which will handle the /edit/<id> URL
        func EditTaskFunc(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
                //Code
                task := db.GetTaskByID(id)
                editTemplate.Execute(w, task)
                //Code
        }

file `db/tasks.go`

        func GetTaskByID(id int) types.Context {
                //Code to fetch tasks of the current user
                context := types.Context{Tasks: tasks}
                return context
        }


The EditTaskFunc talks to the database with the GetTaskByID function and fetches the tasks for the current user and populates the editTemplate.

Thus we can split an application into views, database, templates and controller(main package).

## Static Files
Static files are the CSS/JS/Images which we load into our html templates.

The URL which responds to static files will be `/static/`.

Execution:
1. We get a request like `/static/<filepath>`
2. We go to the public directory of our application and look for <filepath>
3. If we get a file of that path then we serve the file, othewise send a 404 error.

The `public` folder contains all your static files. We will have a templates folder on the same folder where the public is present.

The reason templates is a separate folder is that it is a separate entity and shouldn't be publicly available using the /static/ URL.

        public
        |   |-- static
        |   |   |-- css
        |   |   |   `-- styles.css
                        ..and more
        |   |   `-- js
        |   |       |-- bootstrap.min.js
        |   |       .... and more
        templates
        |   |-- completed.html
        |   |   ...and more        

##### Note Output
The above output is of the `tree` program.

#####Links

-[Previous section](1.0generalTalk.md)
-[Next section](2.0implementationBasics.md)