# Tools

For html: Brackets, a text editor for the web by Adobe.
For Go: Any IDE of your choice which has a Go language plugin.

### gofmt

gofmt is a built in formatting tool. This simple tool formats our gocode according to the standard format, so it doesn't matter who wrote it because once we
want to check in the code, we can format it, this saves a *lot* of time. Almost all IDEs provide the gofmt on save feature, 
then you can use this `go fmt -w Tasks`, where Tasks is my folder name. This code will run `gofmt` on each go file in my project.

It is a good practice to run gofmt on our code before committing to version control since it standardizes formatting of the entire codebase.

This is one of the best parts of Go, if you are familiar with Python then there are multiple standards like the 4 space rule or the 2 space rule
or the tab rule, in other languages like shell/C/C++ there are multiple ways to format code and it is truly uncomfortable to see code written in some other way
for instance this

`example 1.0`

			func void PrintSomething() {
				
			}
		
`example 1.1`

			func void PrintSomething() 
			{
				
			}

For me, seeing the second piece of code is *annoying*, why can't people just format the code in example 1.0 way?
Well, the ones who do, ask me the same question! But example1.1 is a syntax error in Go, so this argument is now null and void.

This way when multiple people work on the same codebase, it won't look like an alien with automated code review tools or someone else for that matter touches 
the code base and it is a way to reduce the formatting wars and getting things done in the language.

Hence the Go authors came up with this amazing solution, a built in tool which formats gocode in the standard way.

### godoc

Godoc is a built in documentation tool, when we write gocode, we are expected to give comments to each exported function and pretty much every important place
because the exported functions are to be used by some random third party, they *should* have a comment explaining their use and the syntax. Also godoc scans your `$GOPATH`
and generates documentation on a server, the `golang.org` website is godoc running in production. When you start the godoc server, you'll notice that it gives you 
a html front end to the documentation of *all* your Go code,

The -v flag is for verbose, for some reason godoc doesn't notify the user by printing on the terminal that "server started on port 8080", so we have to use the -v mode to get to know
when the server started running, because it is rather annoying to keep opening the `localhost:6060` URL ten times when in the fifteenth time the server has started.
If you want to jump to any specific package, go to /pkg/name, for instance if you want to go to the documentation of `net/http` the link is `localhost:6060/pkg/net/http`

Usage: `godoc -http=:6060 -v`


### go test

`go test` is the testing tool for Go. If you are writing the test cases for `main.go` the file should be called `main_test.go`. We'll see more about testing in later
chapters where we start to write Go code. 

### go build

This is the build tool in Go. When you run it on your project root it'll build the project, the binary will be named after the name of your root folder, for instance
if I build my Tasks application, the since the folder is `Tasks` in my src tree, the binary will be named `Tasks`. You can instruct go build to create a binary of any name
by running `go build -o task` so it'll create a binary with the name of task. A go package can have only one main file, but a project can have multiple go files, you can also
give the name of the file you want to build as `go build file.go`


##### Note Cross compilation

Go provides you with the ability to cross compile code across platforms. 

	env GOOS=darwin GOARCH=386 go build -o tasks.app
	env GOOS=windows GOARCH=386 go build -o tasks.exe

If there are no quirks on the libraries, should give you a binary for the respective platforms.

 
### go run

As we have seen, we can use `go build` to generate a binary, what if we just want to run it once but don't care for a binary. This is the reason go run was created, it
builds your project and runs it in the `/tmp` directory so a binary isn't left in your project directory. 

### go get

This is a way to install packages from various websites like github, bitbucket, launchpad. What `go get` does is it clones the repo in your `$GOPATH/src` folder and runs
`go install` on the package, which in turn creates a `.a` file and puts it in the respective `$GOPATH/pkg` folder tree

### go install

You can install your applications in your `$GOPATH/bin` using this command. It builds the project and places a binary directly in the `$GOPATH/bin`. 
If you want to use the installed applications then you need to add the `$GOPATH/bin` in your path.

#### Links

- Previous section: [Installation](0.0install.md)
- Next section: [Go Programming Basics](1.0general_talk.md)