## What makes Go different from other languages?

The Go programming language was created for writing large scale software effectively. This is the reason the language has strict usage guidelines. In C like languages there are two factions of programmers,

those who do this

    public static void main() {

    }
    
and those who do this
 
    public static void main() 
    {

    }

The same can be said of Python four spaces/tabs.

This might seem to be a shallow problem at the top, but when the codebase and team size grows, then it is difficult to maintain the code's "beauty"  because of different user preferences. Anyone can write code these days, either by themselves or by copying over the Internet, we should strive to write elegant code, with as many comments as possible. Python has PEP8, which was created to bring in some discipline for formatting and naming conventions.

Go was built at Google, as company we know as a synonym for Search and Distributed Computing, with their Borg. They wanted a language that was fast, worked well with automated code review and formatting and allowed a large team to write large scale software effectively. They didn't want users of Go to get involved in the never ending trivial wars of 4 spaces vs 1 tab, hence there are many restrictions on the language. Also all the major language are decades old, they were created in a time where memory was costly, thus concurrency wasn't a problem for their creators. Since Intel Israel came up with the multi core idea, all processor chips are multi cores, Go was designed with concurrency in mind. As Rob Pike, in his amazing talk said, Concurrency isn't parallelism.

1. Unused imports/variables are compiler errors
1. No need to put semicolon's because the compiler itself will add semi colons at the end of line, this is the reason you can't write functions like the second way, we mentioned in the above section
1. All your Go code is present in a single folder, $GOPATH, it is called. Say goodbye to your code thrown all around in your machine
1. gofmt will format your code, so there is one standard way to write Go code.
1. Built in http/testing support  
1. Compiled language, thus very fast.
1. Can write webapps without any frameworks.

# 2.1 Hello, Go

Let's start with a simple example, the customary Hello World.

## Program

	package main
	
	import "fmt"
	
	func main() {
		fmt.Printf("Hello, world or 你好，世界 or καλημ ́ρα κóσμ or こんにちは世界\n")
	}
	
It prints following information.

	Hello, world or 你好，世界 or καλημ ́ρα κóσμ or こんにちは世界
	
## Explanation

Go programs use packages, which are same as libraries in other languages. Main is a special package in Go, when the compiler starts compiling the source code, it starts with the main package. 

`package <pkgName>` (In this case is `package main`) tells us this source file belongs to `main` package, and the keyword `main` tells us this package will be compiled to a program instead of package files whose extensions are `.a`.

Per executable program, there can be only one main package, and one main function with no arguments passed or returned. The Printf function, is imported from the format package called `fmt`, we import a package using `import "fmt"`. When calling a function name or referring to a variable inside another package, we use pkgName.FunctionName like `fmt.Println()`.

Also, Go supports multiple return values!

In the example, we printed non ASCII characters. Go supports UTF-8 by default. 

### The main package
Every Go program should be in a package, it can be either Main or any other package. Each package other than main should be present as a distinct folder in to $GOPATH. This means that you can directly create a main.go file with `package main` at it's start without creating a main folder and a main.go file inside it. 

Care needs to be taken while building/running the application.

- With main folder:

			[Tasks] $ go build main/main.go
			[Tasks] $ ./main/main

This will function correctly, because we are in the Tasks directory while executing our binary, all the templates and other files are present in this folder.

- Without the main folder

			[Tasks/main] $ go build main.go
			[Tasks/main] $ ./main

Here, we are in the Tasks/main directory, the binary will expect all the other files in the Tasks/main directory when they are in the Tasks directory,
