#Working with Forms

HTML forms are used to get data from the user. Forms can use both the GET and POST methods for transferring data to the server, but it is 
recommended to use HTTP POST method just because it doesn't highlight data in the URL and because of the many things we discussed in the 
chapter Web Programming Basics.

There are two parts of working with forms, the HTML part and the Go part. The HTML page gets the data and sends it to the server as a POST/GET
and the Go part will parse the form to do some task like letting the user to login or inserting data in the database.
		
		<form action="/add/" method="POST">
			<div class="form-group">
				<input type="text" name="title" class="form-control" id="add-note-title" placeholder="Title" 
				style="border:none;border-bottom:1px solid gray; box-shadow:none;">
			</div>
			<div class="form-group">
				<textarea class="form-control" name="content" id="add-note-content" placeholder="Content" 
				rows="10" style="border:none;border-bottom:1px solid gray; box-shadow:none;"></textarea>
			</div>
			</div>
			<div class="modal-footer">
				<button type="button" class="btn btn-default" data-dismiss="modal">Close</button>
				<input type="submit" text="submit" class="btn btn-default" />
			</div>
		</form>

This is the form we use to get the task title and content from the user. It is triggered as a modal window when the user clicks on the red action button.
This sends a POST request taking the title 

The POST data is actually sent like this

				(Request-Line)	POST /add/ HTTP/1.1
				Host	localhost:8080
				User-Agent	.....
				Accept	text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
				Accept-Language	en-US,en;q=0.5
				Accept-Encoding	gzip, deflate
				DNT	1
				Referer	http://localhost:8080/
				Cookie	redirects=MTQ1MDM3;messages=MTQ;
				Connection	keep-alive
				Content-Type	application/x-www-form-urlencoded
				Content-Length	27
				title=random&content=random


If you had wondered how Google's home page shows a pop up when you visit google.com on IE of Firefox, it checks your User-Agent.
The thing with HTTP request is that they can be modified to any extent, the Chrome developer tools gives you quite sophisticated tools to
modify your requests, even User Agent spoofing is a default feature avaiable, this feature is available so we can test our webapps in one window
simulating many internet browsers at one go.

The basic part of working with forms is to identify which user that particular form belongs to, there are ways to attain that, we can either have a
stateful or a stateless web server.

A stateless server doesn't store sessions, it requires an authentication key for each request while a stateful server stores sessions. For storing sessions
a cookie is used, which is a file which is stored in the private memory of the web browser which we use. Only the website which created the cookie can
access the cookie, no third party websites can access the cookies, but the OS user can read/edit/delete cookies using the web browser.

#### CSRF

CSRF stands for Cross Request Site Forgery. Any website can send a POST request to your web server, who sent the request can be found in the `Referer`
field of your HTTP response. It is a form of confused deputy attack in which the deputy is your web browser. A malicious user doesn't have direct 
access to your website, so it makes use of your browser to send a malicious request. Typically cookies enable your browser to authenticate itself
to a webserver, so what these malicious websites do is, they send in a HTTP request on behalf of your browser.

We can thwart this attack by restricting the referer to your own domain, but it is quite easy to manipulate the misspelt referer field of a HTTP
request.

Another way is to use tokens. While rendering our form, we send in a hidden field with crypto generated string of 256 characters, so when we
process the POST request, we first check if the token is valid or not and then decide if the data came from a genuine source or from a malicious source.
It doesn't have to be malicious actually, even if a legitimate user tried to trick your webserver into accepting data, we shouldn't entertain it.

To check the csrf token, we serve the token to the form and store it in a cookie, when we get the POST request, we check if both are equal or not.
This is because a malicious person might trick a user to click on a form but they can't set cookies for your webapplication.

A point to note here is that *never trust user data*. Always clean/sanitize data which you get from the end user.

###### Note Javascript
If you are serious about web development, you ought to learn Javascript in detail. While building a web app, there will be times when you would
want to improve the UI of your application, which would mean a change in the html page. Using JS is inevitable while building beautiful webapps, 
while adding some new html feature, open the "web inspector" present in the developer tools and dynamically add the html code. The web inspector
allows us to manipulate the CSS and HTML part. Now open the javascript console, that enables you to test the JS feature which you are willing to add.
For instance, in the tasks application, there was no provision to expand/contract the size of the task, so I added a button in the web inspector,

			<button class="toggle"></button>

In the JS console, to toggle the visibility of my `.noteContent` field, I did this:

			$('.toggle').next().toggle() 

This proved that it works, so now go to your template and actually add the code. Make sure the html is correct because while running, the html files
are parsed once, so for any html change, you have to run the web app for each HTML change. So once the html is set up, if you change the JS/CSS then 
you just have to refresh the page, because the html page gets the JS/CSS each time the page is loaded.

As we saw in the above paragraph, for preventing CSRF, we need to generate a *token* and send as a hidden field in the form and store it in a cookie,
when we get the POST request from the

#### Forms in Go
In the below function we set the cookie, we first generate a CSRF token, which'll be unique for each HTTP request which we get and store it
in a cookie.

				//ShowAllTasksFunc is used to handle the "/" URL which is the default ons
				func ShowAllTasksFunc(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
					if r.Method == "GET" {
						context := db.GetTasks("pending") //true when you want non deleted notes
						if message != "" {
							context.Message = message
						}
						context.CSRFToken = "abcd"
						message = ""
						expiration := time.Now().Add(365 * 24 * time.Hour)
						cookie	:=	http.Cookie{Name: "csrftoken",Value:"abcd",Expires:expiration}
						http.SetCookie(w, &cookie)
						homeTemplate.Execute(w, context)
					} else {
						message = "Method not allowed"
						http.Redirect(w, r, "/", http.StatusFound)
					}
				}

The below handler handles the POST request sent by our form, it fetches the value of the csrftoken cookie and gets the value of the hidden `CSRFToken`
field of the add task form. If the value of the cookie is equal to the value fetched by the form, then we allow it to go to the database.

			//AddTaskFunc is used to handle the addition of new task, "/add" URL
			func AddTaskFunc(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
				if r.Method == "POST" { 
					// Will work only for POST requests, will redirect to home for GET
					r.ParseForm()
					title := template.HTMLEscapeString(r.Form.Get("title"))
					content := template.HTMLEscapeString(r.Form.Get("content"))
					formToken := template.HTMLEscapeString(r.Form.Get("CSRFToken"))
					cookie,	_	:=	r.Cookie("csrftoken")
					
					if formToken == cookie.Value and title != nil and content != nil {
						truth := db.AddTask(title, content)
						if truth != nil {
							message = "Error adding task"
						} else {
							message = "Task added"
						}
						http.Redirect(w, r, "/", http.StatusFound)
					}
			
				} else {
					message = "Method not allowed"
					http.Redirect(w, r, "/", http.StatusFound)
				}
			}


######Note Cookies
Cookie is a way to store data on the browser, HTTP is a stateless protocol, it wasn't built for sessions, basically the Internet itself wasn't
built considering security in mind since initially it was just a way to share documents online, hence HTTP is stateless, when the web server
receives requests, it can't distinguish between two consequitive requests, hence the concept of cookies were added, thus while starting a session,
we generate a session ID and store it on the database in memory or on the database and we store the same ID on a cookie on the web browser and we
validate both of them to authenticate them.

We have to note that, if we set an expiry date for a cookie, then it is stored on the filesystem otherwise it is stored in memory in the browser.
In the *incognito* mode, this is the case, all the cookies are stored in memory and not in the filesystem.

HTTP Request
	
				Host: localhost:8080
				User-Agent: .....
				Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
				Accept-Language: en-US,en;q=0.5
				Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
				DNT: 1
				Referer: http://localhost:8080/
				Cookie: csrftoken=abcd
				Connection: keep-alive
				Cache-Control: max-age=0

The browser while sending a response, appends all the cookie data stored in its memory or file along with the other aspects of the HTTP request
so we can access the cookie as `r.cookie`, it'll contain *every* cookie, we'd then loop through it to fetch the data which we want.

HTTP Response

			Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
			Date: Tue, 12 Jan 2016 16:43:53 GMT
			Set-Cookie: csrftoken=abcd; Expires=Wed, 11 Jan 2017 16:43:53 GMT
			Transfer-Encoding: chunked

When we set cookies, we write then to the HTTP response which we send to the client and the browser reads the Cookie information and stores them
in the memory or the filesystem depending on the  `Expires` field of the response.

From the go documentation:

			type Cookie struct {
				Name  string
				Value string
			
				Path       string    // optional
				Domain     string    // optional
				Expires    time.Time // optional
				RawExpires string    // for reading cookies only
			
				// MaxAge=0 means no 'Max-Age' attribute specified.
				// MaxAge<0 means delete cookie now, equivalently 'Max-Age: 0'
				// MaxAge>0 means Max-Age attribute present and given in seconds
				MaxAge   int
				Secure   bool
				HttpOnly bool
				Raw      string
				Unparsed []string // Raw text of unparsed attribute-value pairs
			}

#Input Validation

The basic aspect of web applications is that no data can be trusted, even if the user isn't malicious herself, there are many ways to trick the
browser into sending HTTP requests and fooling the web server to respond to what seems like a legitimate request. Hence we have to verify everything
that comes from the user.

One might argue here that we do all sorts of validation using javascript, but there are ways to evade JS validations, the simplest way is to
disable JS and more sophisticated ways are to manipulate the HTTP request before the browser sends it, it is literally trivial when we use 
just the web developer tools that these days browsers provide.

			if formToken == cookie.Value and title != nil and content!=nil
			
The title and content of the task is mandatory, hence we added the not nil part.

We do input validation when we don't want junk data to go into our database, suppose the user hit the submit button twice, or some other scenario.
But we also have to consider the case where the user wants to run some script on our website, which is dangerous, so we use the `template.HTMLEscapeString`
method to escape what might run in memory of the current browser session. Even the data which comes from your drop down list should be  validated.

#Uploading files

Uploading files is the next step in form processing, in case of files, we send the entire file data in the HTTP header, so we have to set the form
encoding to `enctype="multipart/form-data"`. This will inform our server that we are going to get a file from the form along with the rest of the 
fields, if any. 

This means we can get either either file(s) and data or just file(s) or just data and no file(s).

At the first line of our HTTP handler, we have to write this line, if this line is not present in the first line then it gives unexpected results


			file, handler, err := r.FormFile("uploadfile")
	
			if handler != nil {
					r.ParseMultipartForm(32 << 20) //defined maximum size of file
					defer file.Close()
					f, err := os.OpenFile("./files/"+handler.Filename, os.O_WRONLY|os.O_CREATE, 0666)
					if err != nil {
						log.Println(err)
						return
					}
					defer f.Close()
					io.Copy(f, file)
					filelink := "<br> <a href=./files/"+handler.Filename+">"+ handler.Filename+"</a>"
					content =  content + filelink
			}

We first provide the maximum size of the file which is 32 ^ 20, which is gigantic for our webapp, not everyone has the Internet infrastructure to
upload that big a file, but we want to be flexible.

We basically get a file from the form request, in the form handler we open another file with the same/different name
and then read the file form the request and write it on the server. We need to handle the scene where we name the file differently
so we'd need to store the old file name -> new file name relation somewhere, it can be a database table.

It is recommended to **NOT** keep the same name as the user, because *user data can't be trusted* is the holy grail of web app
development, so we need to escape the scrub the file for malicious content/name.